# Custom operators

RxJava offers a very large [operator set](http://reactivex.io/RxJava/javadoc/rx/Observable.html). Counting all the overloads, the number of operators on Rx is over 200. A smaller number of those is essential, meaning that you cannot achieve an Rx implementation without them. Others are there just for convenience and for a more self-descriptive name. For example, if `source.First(user -> user.isOnline())` didn't exist, we would still be able to do `source.filter(user -> user.isOnline()).First()`.

Despite many convenience operators, the operator set of RxJava is still very basic. It provides the building blocks for the developer to do something useful. There is no operator for calculating a running average from a sequence of numbers. But you can make one yourself:

```java
class AverageAcc {
	public final int sum;
	public final int count;
	public AverageAcc(int sum, int count) {
		this.sum = sum;
		this.count = count;
	}
}
```
```java
source
	.scan(
		new AverageAcc(0,0),
		(acc, v) -> new AverageAcc(acc.sum + v, acc.count + 1))
	.filter(acc -> acc.count > 0)
	.map(acc -> acc.sum/(double)acc.count);
```

That does it, but it's not reusable. In a real application, you will probably want to do the same kind of processing over many different sequences. Even if you don't, you'd still want to hide all this code behind a single phrase: "running average". Understandably, your first instinct would be to make a function out of this:

```java
public static Observable<Double> runningAverage(Observable<Integer> source) {
	return source
		.scan(
			new AverageAcc(0,0),
			(acc, v) -> new AverageAcc(acc.sum + v, acc.count + 1))
		.filter(acc -> acc.count > 0)
		.map(acc -> acc.sum/(double)acc.count);
}
```

And you can easily use it:

```java
runningAverage(Observable.just(3, 5, 6, 4, 4))
	.subscribe(System.out::println);
```
Output
```
3.0
4.0
4.666666666666667
4.5
4.4
```

The above example looks fine because it's simple. Let's do something a little more complicated with our custom operator. Let's take a phrase, turn it into a sequence of word lengths and calculate the running average for that.

```java
runningAverage(
	Observable.just("The brown fox jumped and I forget the rest")
		.flatMap(phrase -> Observable.from(phrase.split(" ")))
		.map(word -> word.length()))
	.subscribe(System.out::println);
```

Once again, this works, but how far can you go with this? Imagine if everything in Rx was done this way (including all the existing operators).

```java
subscribe(
    lastOperator(
        middleOperator(
            firstOperator(source))))
```

We're reading our pipeline in reverse! Yykes!

## Chaining operators

Rx has a particular style for applying operators, by chaining them, rather than nesting them. This style is not uncommon for objects whose methods return instances of the same type. This makes even more sense for immutable objects and can be found even in standard features, such as strings: `String s = new String("Hi").toLowerCase().replace('a', 'c');`. This style allows you to see modifications in the order that they are applied, and it also looks neater when a lot of operators are applied.

Ideally, you would want your operators to fit into the chain just like any other operator:
```java
Observable.range(0,10)
    .map(i -> i*2)
    .myOperator()
    .subscribe();
```

Many languages have way of supporting this. Inconveniently, Java doesn't. You'd have to edit `Observable` iteself to add your own methods. There's no point asking for it either, since the RxJava team are conservative about adding even more operators. You could `extend` `Observable` to add your own operators. In that case, as soon as you call any of the old operators, you're going to get a vanilla `Observable` back, with no access to your operators.

### compose

There is a way of fitting a custom operator into the chain with the `compose` method.

```java
public <R> Observable<R> compose(Observable.Transformer<? super T,? extends R> transformer)
```

Aha! A `Transformer` interface! `Transformer<T,R>` actually just an alias for the `Func1<Observable<T>,Observable<R>>` interface. It is a method that takes an `Observable<T>` and returns an `Observable<R>`, just like the one we made for calculating a running average.

```java
Observable.just(3, 5, 6, 4, 4)
    .compose(Main::runningAverage)
	.subscribe(System.out::println);
```

Java doesn't let you reference a function by its name alone, so here we assumed the custom operator is in our Main class. We can see that our operator fits perfecty into the chain, albeit with the boilderplate of calling `compose` first. For even better encapsulation, you should actually implement `Observable.Transformer` and move the whole thing out of sight along with its helper class(es).

```java
class RunningAverage implements Observable.Transformer<Integer, Double> {
	private static class AverageAcc {
		public final int sum;
		public final int count;
		public AverageAcc(int sum, int count) {
			this.sum = sum;
			this.count = count;
		}
	}
	
	@Override
	public Observable<Double> call(Observable<Integer> source) {
		return source
			.scan(
				new AverageAcc(0,0),
				(acc, v) -> new AverageAcc(acc.sum + v, acc.count + 1))
			.filter(acc -> acc.count > 0)
			.map(acc -> acc.sum/(double)acc.count);
	}
}
```

And call like this
```java
source.compose(new RunningAverage())
```

Most Rx operators are parameterisable. We are able to do this as well. Let's extend the functionality of our operator with the possiblity to ignore values above a certain threshold.

```java
class RunningAverage implements Observable.Transformer<Integer, Double> {
	private static class AverageAcc {
		public final int sum;
		public final int count;
		public AverageAcc(int sum, int count) {
			this.sum = sum;
			this.count = count;
		}
	}
	
	final int threshold;
	
	public RunningAverage() {
		this.threshold = Integer.MAX_VALUE;
	}
	
	public RunningAverage(int threshold) {
		this.threshold = threshold;
	}
	
	@Override
	public Observable<Double> call(Observable<Integer> source) {
		return source
			.filter(i -> i< this.threshold)
			.scan(
				new AverageAcc(0,0),
				(acc, v) -> new AverageAcc(acc.sum + v, acc.count + 1))
			.filter(acc -> acc.count > 0)
			.map(acc -> acc.sum/(double)acc.count);
	}
}
```

We just added the parameter as a field in the operator, added constructors for the uses that we cover and used the parameter in our Rx operations. Now we can do `source.compose(new RunningAverage(5))`, where, ideally, we would be calling `source.runningAverage(5)`. Java only lets us go this far.

### lift

TODO

### Benefits of lift

TODO


