# Scheduling and threading

Because Rx is targeted at asynchronous systems and because Rx can naturally support multithreading, new Rx developers sometimes assume that Rx is multithreaded by default. It is important clarify before anything else that __Rx is single-threaded by default__.

_Unless you specify otherwise_, every call to `onNext`/`onError`/`onCompleted` executes the entire chain of operators synchronously, including the actions of the final subscriber. We can see than in the following example:

```java
final BehaviorSubject<Integer> subject = BehaviorSubject.create();
subject.subscribe(i -> {
	System.out.println("Received " + i + " on " + Thread.currentThread().getId());
});

int[] i = {1}; // naughty side-effects for examples only ;)
Runnable r = () -> {
	synchronized(i) {
		System.out.println("onNext(" + i[0] + ") on " + Thread.currentThread().getId());
		subject.onNext(i[0]++);
	}
};

r.run(); // Execute on main thread
new Thread(r).start();
new Thread(r).start();
```
[Output](/tests/java/itrx/chapter4/scheduling/SingleThreadedExample.java)
```
onNext(1) on 1
Received 1 on 1
onNext(2) on 11
Received 2 on 11
onNext(3) on 12
Received 3 on 12
```

We see here that we called `onNext` on our subject from 3 different threads. Every time, the subscriber's action was executed on the same thread where the first `onNext` call came from. The same would be true no matter how many operators we had chained together. The value goes through the chain synchronously, unless we request otherwise.


## subscribeOn and observeOn

`subscribeOn` and `observeOn` allow you to control the invocation of the subscription and the reception of notifications (what thread will call `onNext`/`onError`/`onCompleted` on your observer).

```java
public final Observable<T> observeOn(Scheduler scheduler)
public final Observable<T> subscribeOn(Scheduler scheduler)
```

In Rx you don't juggle threads directly. Instead you wrap them in policies called `Scheduler`. We will see more on that later.

### subscribeOn

With `subscribeOn` you decide on what Scheduler the `Observable.create` is executed. Even if you're not calling `create` yourself, there is an internal equivalent to it. Consider the following example:

```java
System.out.println("Main: " + Thread.currentThread().getId());
		
Observable.create(o -> {
		System.out.println("Created on " + Thread.currentThread().getId());
		o.onNext(1);
		o.onNext(2);
		o.onCompleted();
	})
	//.subscribeOn(Schedulers.newThread())
	.subscribe(i -> {
		System.out.println("Received " + i + " on " + Thread.currentThread().getId());
	});

System.out.println("Finished main: " + Thread.currentThread().getId());
```
[Output](/tests/java/itrx/chapter4/scheduling/SubscribeOnExample.java)
```
Main: 1
Created on 1
Received 1 on 1
Received 2 on 1
Finished main: 1
```

We see here that, not only is everything executed on the same thread, it is actually sequential: `subscribe` does not unblock until it has completed subscribing to (and thus creating) the observable, which includes executing the body of `create`'s lambda parameter. The calls to `onNext` within that lambda execute the entire chain of operators, all the way to the `println`. Effectively, subscribing on a `create`d observable is blocking.

If you uncomment `.subscribeOn(Schedulers.newThread())`, the [output](/tests/java/itrx/chapter4/scheduling/SubscribeOnExample.java) now is
```
Main: 1
Finished main: 1
Created on 11
Received 1 on 11
Received 2 on 11
```

`Schedulers.newThread()` provided a new thread for our lambda function to run on. `subscribe` no longer blocks until `create`'s lambda is executed and the main thread is free to proceed.

Some observables create their own threads regardless of you what you requested. For example, `Observable.interval` is asynchronous regardless. In such cases, `subscribeOn` will dictate on what thread to run the function which creates the resources, which typically won't be helpful. It gives you no control over what resources will be leased.

```java
System.out.println("Main: " + Thread.currentThread().getId());
		
Observable.interval(100, TimeUnit.MILLISECONDS)
	.subscribe(i -> {
		System.out.println("Received " + i + " on " + Thread.currentThread().getId());
	});

System.out.println("Finished main: " + Thread.currentThread().getId());
```
[Output](/tests/java/itrx/chapter4/scheduling/SubscribeOnExample.java)
```
Main: 1
Finished main: 1
Received 0 on 11
Received 1 on 11
Received 2 on 11
```

### observeOn

`observeOn` controls the other side of the pipeline. The creation and emission of values will work like normal, but the actions of your observer will be invoked on a different thread, as specified by the `Scheduler` policy.

```java
Observable.create(o -> {
		System.out.println("Created on " + Thread.currentThread().getId());
		o.onNext(1);
		o.onNext(2);
		o.onCompleted();
	})
	.observeOn(Schedulers.newThread())
	.subscribe(i ->
		System.out.println("Received " + i + " on " + Thread.currentThread().getId()));
```
[Output](/tests/java/itrx/chapter4/scheduling/ObserveOnExample.java)
```
Created on 1
Received 1 on 13
Received 2 on 13
```

Unlike `subscribeOn`, `observeOn`'s effect doesn't jump to the start of the pipeline. It just changes the thread for the operators that come after it. You can think of it as intercepting events and changing the thread for the rest of the chain. Here's an example for this:

```java
Observable.create(o -> {
		System.out.println("Created on " + Thread.currentThread().getId());
		o.onNext(1);
		o.onNext(2);
		o.onCompleted();
	})
	.doOnNext(i -> 
		System.out.println("Before " + i + " on " + Thread.currentThread().getId()))
	.observeOn(Schedulers.newThread())
	.doOnNext(i -> 
		System.out.println("After " + i + " on " + Thread.currentThread().getId()))
	.subscribe();
```
[Output](/tests/java/itrx/chapter4/scheduling/ObserveOnExample.java)
```
Created on 1
Before 1 on 1
Before 2 on 1
After 1 on 13
After 2 on 13
```

We can see here that events start on the thread that calls `onNext` and stay on that thread until they encounter the `observeOn` operator. After that, they continue on the new thread. This way you can assign different threading policies to different parts of an Rx pipeline.

This is very useful if you, as the consumer of an observable, know that processing is time-consuming and you don't want to block the producing thread. A typical case for this is applications with a GUI. GUI libraries have a special thread that has the exclusive right to access GUI components (buttons etc). While the GUI thread is busy, everything becomes non-responsive. Handlers to GUI events are invoked on the GUI thread and everything the handler does will block the GUI thread. In order not to have your application freeze for the duration of the processing, you must move heavy processing to another thread. You can use `observeOn` to move away and again to return to the GUI thread, when the data is ready to be displayed.

### unsubscribeOn

As we have seen, some observables depend on resources which are leased on subscription and released when subscriptions end. Typically, releasing resources is cheap. In exceptional cases, where you need the unsubscription actions to not block or to specifically take place on a special thread, you can specify the scheduler that will execute those actions with `unsubscribeOn`

```java
Observable<Object> source = Observable.using(
	() -> {
		System.out.println("Subscribed on " + Thread.currentThread().getId());
		return Arrays.asList(1,2);
	},
	(ints) -> {
		System.out.println("Producing on " + Thread.currentThread().getId());
		return Observable.from(ints);
	},
	(ints) -> {
		System.out.println("Unubscribed on " + Thread.currentThread().getId());
	}
);

source
	.unsubscribeOn(Schedulers.newThread())
	.subscribe(System.out::println);
```
[Output](/tests/java/itrx/chapter4/scheduling/UnsubscribeOnExample.java)
```
Subscribed on 1
Producing on 1
1
2
Unubscribed on 11
```

The `using` method executes 3 functions, one that leases a resource, one that uses it and one the releases it. With `unsubscribeOn` we only affected the function that releases the resource.


## Schedulers

The `observeOn` and `subscribeOn` methods take as an argument a [Scheduler](http://reactivex.io/RxJava/javadoc/rx/Scheduler.html). A `Scheduler`, as the name suggests, is a tool that can schedule individual actions to be performed. The specifics of how the action will be invoked depends on the implementation of the scheduler used. You can create your own implementation of scheduler, but most of time you'll find that RxJava already has you covered with a set of Schedulers for the common cases. You can get the existing implementations from the factory methods on [Schedulers](http://reactivex.io/RxJava/javadoc/rx/schedulers/Schedulers.html).

The existing schedulers are as follows
* `immediate` executes the scheduled action synchronously. No actual scheduling takes place.
* `trampoline` queues work on the current thread to be executed after the current work completes.
* `newThread` creates a new thread for each scheduled unit of work.
* `computation` is intended for CPU work
* `io` is intended for IO work
* `test` is useful for testing and debugging.

In the current implementation, `computation` and `io` schedulers aren't actually unique implementations. The point of this separation is to have unique instances, while also documenting your intent.

Many of the Rx operators use schedulers internally. If you revisit the [Observable](http://reactivex.io/RxJava/javadoc/rx/Observable.html) operators that you've seen so far, you'll see that all the asynchronous operators have overloads that take a `Scheduler`. You can dictate exactly what scheduler each operator uses. You can also find in the documentation which scheduler they use when you don't provide one.


## Advanced features of schedulers

The approaches and implementations for scheduling used in Rx schedulers aren't specific to Rx. In fact, they are quite standard and could be used without any Rx code. You typically won't have to use schedulers directly, except for when you are designing a custom asynchronous operator. Using schedulers in custom operators isn't only convenient, but it also allow asynchronous operators to become testable, as we will see in the next chapter.

An implementation of `Scheduler` has two parts. One is the notion of time, which you can get through the `now()` method. Implementing time through the scheduler is going to prove useful when virtualising time for testing, but for now this feature isn't interesting.

The interesting part is `createWorker()`, which returns a [Scheduler.Worker](http://reactivex.io/RxJava/javadoc/rx/Scheduler.Worker.html). A worker accepts actions and executes them sequentially on a single thread. In a way, a worker is a scheduler itself, but we will not refer to it as a scheduler to avoid confusion.

### Scheduling an action

The way to schedule a job on any `Scheduler` is to create a new worker for that scheduler and schedule actions on that worker.

```java
Scheduler.Worker worker = scheduler.createWorker();
worker.schedule(
	() -> System.out.println("Action"));
```

The action is then queued to be executed on the thread that the worker is assigned to.

As you would expect from a scheduler, you can also schedule actions to be executed in the future once or repeatedly with the following methods: 
```java
Subscription schedule(
	Action0 action,
	long delayTime,
	java.util.concurrent.TimeUnit unit)
Subscription schedulePeriodically(
	Action0 action,
	long initialDelay,
	long period,
	java.util.concurrent.TimeUnit unit)
```

```java
Scheduler scheduler = Schedulers.newThread();
long start = System.currentTimeMillis();
Scheduler.Worker worker = scheduler.createWorker();
worker.schedule(
	() -> System.out.println(System.currentTimeMillis()-start),
	5, TimeUnit.SECONDS);
worker.schedule(
	() -> System.out.println(System.currentTimeMillis()-start),
	5, TimeUnit.SECONDS);
```
[Output](/tests/java/itrx/chapter4/scheduling/SchedulerExample.java)
```
5033
5035
```

We can see here that delay for the execution is measured from the moment of scheduling. The specified time is not a mandatory sleep period in between tasks. The worker can do work in the meantime, if there is work ready for execution.

### Canceling work

`Scheduler.Worker` extends `Subscription`. Calling the `unsubscribe` method on a worker will result in the queue being emptied and all pending tasks being cancelled. We can see that by modifying out previous example

```java
Scheduler scheduler = Schedulers.newThread();
long start = System.currentTimeMillis();
Scheduler.Worker worker = scheduler.createWorker();
worker.schedule(
	() -> {
		System.out.println(System.currentTimeMillis()-start);
		worker.unsubscribe();
	},
	5, TimeUnit.SECONDS);
worker.schedule(
	() -> System.out.println(System.currentTimeMillis()-start),
	5, TimeUnit.SECONDS);
```
[Output](/tests/java/itrx/chapter4/scheduling/SchedulerExample.java)
```
5032
```

The second task is never executed because the one before it cancelled everything. Actions that were in the process of being executed will be interrupted. In the next example, we will create a task that sleeps for 2000ms. 500ms after it has begun executing we cancel all work on the worker. This results in an `InterruptedException`.

```java
Scheduler scheduler = Schedulers.newThread();
long start = System.currentTimeMillis();
Scheduler.Worker worker = scheduler.createWorker();
worker.schedule(() -> {
	try {
		Thread.sleep(2000);
		System.out.println("Action completed");
	} catch (InterruptedException e) {
		System.out.println("Action interrupted");
	}
});
Thread.sleep(500);
worker.unsubscribe();
```
[Output](/tests/java/itrx/chapter4/scheduling/SchedulerExample.java)
```
Action interrupted
```

As we saw earlier in the signature of `schedule`, scheduling returns a `Subscription`. Rather that canceling all work, you can cancel individual tasks via that `Subscription` that was created while scheduling.

## Existing schedulers

### ImmediateScheduler

`ImmediateScheduler` doesn't do any scheduling at all. Upon request for scheduling, the scheduler instead just executes the action synchronously and returns when the action is completed. Nested requests for scheduling will result in the actions being executed recursively.

```java
Scheduler scheduler = Schedulers.immediate();
Scheduler.Worker worker = scheduler.createWorker();
worker.schedule(() -> {
	System.out.println("Start");
	worker.schedule(() -> System.out.println("Inner"));
	System.out.println("End");
});
```
[Output](/tests/java/itrx/chapter4/scheduling/SchedulersExample.java)
```
Start
Inner
End
```

### TrampolineScheduler

The `TrampolineScheduler`'s worker is also synchronous but does not nest tasks. Instead, it begins with the initial task and any tasks scheduled while executing will be queued for after the current task has completed.

```
Scheduler scheduler = Schedulers.trampoline();
Scheduler.Worker worker = scheduler.createWorker();
worker.schedule(() -> {
	System.out.println("Start");
	worker.schedule(() -> System.out.println("Inner"));
	System.out.println("End");
});
```
[Output](/tests/java/itrx/chapter4/scheduling/SchedulersExample.java)
```
Start
End
Inner
```

The `TrampolineScheduler`'s worker executes every task on the thread that scheduled the first task. In this implementation, the first call to `schedule` is blocking until the queue is emptied. Any calls to `schedule` while executing will be non-blocking and the task will be executed by the thread is blocked.

### NewThreadScheduler

The `NewThreadScheduler` creates workers that each have their own thread. Every scheduled task will be executed on the thread corresponding to that particular worker.

Let us first define a convenient method will make the following examples more readable.
```java
public static void printThread(String message) {
	System.out.println(message + " on " + Thread.currentThread().getId());
}
```
Now we schedule work on a `NewThreadScheduler` worker and demonstrate that the worker is bound to a specific thread.
```java
printThread("Main");
Scheduler scheduler = Schedulers.newThread();
Scheduler.Worker worker = scheduler.createWorker();
worker.schedule(() -> {
	printThread("Start");
	worker.schedule(() -> printThread("Inner"));
	printThread("End");
});
Thread.sleep(500);
worker.schedule(() -> printThread("Again"));
```
[Output](/tests/java/itrx/chapter4/scheduling/SchedulersExample.java)
```
Main on 1
Start on 11
End on 11
Inner on 11
Again on 11
```


#### Continue reading

| Previous | Next |
| --- | --- |
| [Custom operators](/Part%203%20-%20Taming%20the%20sequence/7.%20Custom%20operators.md) | [Testing Rx](/Part%204%20-%20Concurrency/2.%20Testing%20Rx.md)  |
