# Lifetime management

The idea behind Rx is that it is unknown *when* a sequence emits values or terminates, but you still have control over when you begin and stop accepting values. Subscriptions may be linked to allocated resources that you will want to release at the end of a sequence. Rx provides control over your subscriptions to enable you to do that.

## Subscribing

There are several overloads to `Observable.subscribe`, which are shorthands for the same thing.

```java
Subscription 	subscribe()
Subscription 	subscribe(Action1<? super T> onNext)
Subscription 	subscribe(Action1<? super T> onNext, Action1<java.lang.Throwable> onError)
Subscription 	subscribe(Action1<? super T> onNext, Action1<java.lang.Throwable> onError, Action0 onComplete)
Subscription 	subscribe(Observer<? super T> observer)
Subscription 	subscribe(Subscriber<? super T> subscriber)
```

`subscribe()` consumes events but performs no actions. The overloads that take one or more `Action` will construct a `Subscriber` with the functions that you provide. Where you don't give an action, the event is practically ignored.

In the following example, we handle the error of a sequence that failed.

```java
Subject<Integer, Integer> s = ReplaySubject.create();
s.subscribe(
	v -> System.out.println(v),
	e -> System.err.println(e));
s.onNext(0);
s.onError(new Exception("Oops"));
```

Output
```
0
java.lang.Exception: Oops
```

If we do not provide a function for error handling, an `OnErrorNotImplementedException` will be *thrown* at the point where `s.onError` is called, which is the producer's side. It happens here that the producer and the consumer are side-by-side, so we could do a traditional try-catch. However, on a compartmentalised system, the producer and the subscriber very often are in different places. Unless the consumer provides a handle for errors to `subscribe`, they will never know that an error has occured and that the sequence was terminated.

## Unsubscribing

You can also stop receiving values *before* a sequence terminates. Every `subscribe` overload returns an instance of `Subscription`, which is an interface with 2 methods:

```java
boolean isUnsubscribed()
void unsubscribe()
```

Calling `unsubscribe` will stop events from being pushed to your observer.

```java
Subject<Integer, Integer>  values = ReplaySubject.create();
Subscription subscription = values.subscribe(
    v -> System.out.println(v),
    e -> System.err.println(e),
    () -> System.out.println("Done")
);
values.onNext(0);
values.onNext(1);
subscription.unsubscribe();
values.onNext(2);
```
[Output](/tests/java/itrx/chapter1/UnsubscribingExample.java)
```
0
1
```

Unsubscribing one observer does not interfere with other observers on the same observable.

```java
Subject<Integer, Integer>  values = ReplaySubject.create();
Subscription subscription1 = values.subscribe(
    v -> System.out.println("First: " + v)
);
Subscription subscription2 = values.subscribe(
	v -> System.out.println("Second: " + v)
);
values.onNext(0);
values.onNext(1);
subscription1.unsubscribe();
System.out.println("Unsubscribed first");
values.onNext(2);
```
[Output](/tests/java/itrx/chapter1/UnsubscribingExample.java)
```
First: 0
Second: 0
First: 1
Second: 1
Unsubscribed first
Second: 2
```

## onError and onCompleted

`onError` and `onCompleted` mean the termination of a sequence. An observable that complies with the Rx contract will not emit anything after either of those events. This is something to note both when consuming in Rx and when implementing your own observables.

```java
Subject<Integer, Integer>  values = ReplaySubject.create();
Subscription subscription1 = values.subscribe(
    v -> System.out.println("First: " + v),
    e -> System.out.println("First: " + e),
    () -> System.out.println("Completed")
);
values.onNext(0);
values.onNext(1);
values.onCompleted();
values.onNext(2);
```
[Output](/tests/java/itrx/chapter1/RxContractExample.java)
```
First: 0
First: 1
Completed
```

## Freeing resources

A `Subscription` is tied to the resources it uses. For that reason, you should remember to dispose of subscriptions. You can create the binding between a `Subscription` and the necessary resources using the [Subscriptions](http://reactivex.io/RxJava/javadoc/rx/subscriptions/Subscriptions.html) factory.

```java
Subscription s = Subscriptions.create(() -> System.out.println("Clean"));
s.unsubscribe();
```
[Output](/tests/java/itrx/chapter1/UnsubscribingExample.java)
```
Clean
```

`Subscriptions.create` takes an action that will be executed on unsubscription to release the resources. There also are shorthand for common actions when creating a sequence.
* `Subscriptions.empty()` returns a `Subscription` that does nothing when disposed. This is useful when you are required to return an instance of `Subscription`, but your implementation doesn't actually need to release any resources.
* `Subscriptions.from(Subscription... subscriptions)` returns  a `Subscription` that will dispose of multiple other subscriptions when it is disposed.
* `Subscriptions.unsubscribed()` returns a `Subscription` that is already disposed of.

There are several implementations of `Subscription`.

* `BooleanSubscription`
* `CompositeSubscription`
* `MultipleAssignmentSubscription`
* `RefCountSubscription`
* `SafeSubscriber`
* `Scheduler.Worker`
* `SerializedSubscriber`
* `SerialSubscription`
* `Subscriber`
* `TestSubscriber`

We will see more of them later in this book. It is interesting to note that `Subscriber` also implements `Subscription`. This means that we can also use a reference to a `Subscriber` to terminate a subscription.

#### Continue reading

| Previous | Next |
| --- | --- |
| [Key types](/Part%201%20-%20Getting%20Started/2.%20Key%20types.md) | [Chapter 2](/Part%202%20-%20Sequence%20Basics/1.%20Creating%20a%20sequence.md) |
